Hello, I'm Andrew Mayne, and welcome to
the Openai podcast. On today's episode,
we're speaking with Alexander Wang, Hung
Shing Wu, and Le Jia Chen from the
reasoning research team behind a recent
math breakthrough from an Openai model.
They'll tell us the story behind the
discovery and what stood out to them
about the reaction.
>> I would have kind of a hard time
sleeping because it's so [laughter]
so exciting, yeah.
>> Okay, this model is something that's
really amazing.
>> I mean, this is something that can be
published in the best journal of math.
>> Maybe this is the one in a hundred times
where it's too good to be true, but it's
it's actually true.
>> Le Jia, tell me what you work on.
>> Oh, I work on reasoning with Alex.
>> Okay. How did you find your way into
reasoning?
>> Last summer, Alex had this breakthrough
in like IOI and IMO. You know, I used to
be a parti- participant in IOI.
>> Okay.
>> And then I was like, "Oh, that's crazy,
you know, model can already win medals,
and gold medals." At that time, I was a
profess- assistant professor at UC
Berkeley. But then I I was thinking
like, "Maybe I should try to rethink my
my career." And it seems like making a
model smarter will have maybe have some
bigger impact on the on the world. And
then and then I just kind of
had a conversation with Alex like back
in
last October. And then I got super
excited about this thing, and eventually
I just joined Openai.
>> We hear IOI and IMO come up a lot. Alex,
you want to unpack those for everybody?
>> So, IMO and IOI are
uh uh these two competitions for high
schoolers. Uh they stand for the
International Math Olympiad and
International Olympiad of Informatics,
respectively. And these are just
devilishly hard math problems. Uh you
get two sessions for each of these exams
that are like four and a half to five
hours, and you just have to do three
problems. And so, for a long time uh
these were sort of an implicit like
grand challenge in AI. Like, when would
we be able to get models that could
perform as best as well as the best
humans
on these exams?
>> That was a pretty interesting starting
point, I think, for measuring the
success of the model, and we're here to
talk about how far things have gone
since then, which is pretty incredible.
But, how did you find your way into
reasoning?
>> So, I did my PhD in ML.
Um and towards the end of my PhD, I got
excited about this idea of spending more
compute at inference time to solve uh
you know, harder and harder reasoning
problems. At the time, I was playing
with uh GPT-3.5 Turbo in the API.
>> Mhm.
>> And
uh
I I didn't really get any interesting
results, but there was this team at
OpenAI that was seemed to be doing
something pretty similar. And so, I got
super excited about it, and you know,
was lucky enough to be able to join.
>> So, probably the simplest way to
describe that is like letting it
inference time is basically letting the
model think longer about it.
>> Yes, that's right. So, basically
um
before this era of test time compute,
models sort of
answered immediately without like right
off the cuff without thinking. And what
inference time compute test time compute
does is you now let them all give them
all a chance to think and improve its
answer and like try different things
before having to finally output
something. That obviously just helps
make them all smarter, like lets them do
things that they wouldn't otherwise be
able to do instantly.
>> When you started to work on reasoning,
did you have an idea of where you wanted
to see this go?
Like, what your expectations were? Were
you looking at it purely from hey, this
is very cool from an academic point of
view, or did you have some sort of other
vision?
>> Uh I think for me the draw of reasoning
when I first got excited about it was
that this was something that, you know,
models just obviously can't do right
now.
>> Mhm.
>> Um so, this was like end of 2023, start
of 2024, models were, you know,
struggling with grade school math
problems. And so at that time, it was
just like, can we just get the these
models to do something reasonable on
math at all, let alone like have them be
like, you know, like
you know, much, much better than I am at
it. Uh
I remember when I the first my first day
at OpenAI, uh Noam Brown asked me, uh
you know, what I thought models would
get IMO gold.
Uh that was that was a just a benchmark
we talked about. I think at the time, a
lot of people even within research
thought that, like, you know,
uh IMO gold was out of reach this year,
but maybe like 2026. I felt like, you
know, I had an
idea that, you know, if if we like if we
just like pushed for it, maybe I thought
I thought we could do it by April.
Uh it took until June to get a really
good model. Uh but then and then uh IMO
rolled around and, you know, we we were
able to get gold. And I think zooming
out, uh I think this happened a lot
faster than I expected. And it's
I mean, it's it's crazy to me that in
you know, progress since then has
kept up at this uh same sort of
blistering pace.
Uh like it's it was just 10 months ago,
but it feels like the IMO level of
problem like feels like far in like the
rearview mirror of AI today.
>> Uh Noam Brown asked me the same
question. I mean, not about IMO gold,
but about whether my whether my model
can solve P versus NP.
>> Mhm.
>> I think P versus NP might be something
quite hard. Because like I think the
the reason is that I think for solving P
versus NP, you would need to build a new
theory. You you need maybe you have to
write many books of new ideas to get
there. So currently, it seems we are
still far from that. But uh you know,
maybe who knows what will happen in the
future. So, yeah.
>> Function, what you work on.
>> Oh, uh I was working on theoretical
computer science. I was collaborating a
lot with Le DJ in my PhD.
I was at Berkeley and I remember when
like all I can out I was talking to my
advisor
saying oh, there's no barrier in like
model solving math problems anymore. I
think he just smiles and
>> [laughter]
>> maybe he knew that he was going to lose
a student.
>> Oh, wow.
So, let let's talk a bit about that
because it's an interesting point
because as you said it went from the
model we just have a moment to try to
figure out the answer then all of a
sudden you've given it the ability to
spend longer and to think about it, you
know, reasoning. And
the results have come pretty quickly and
and I think surprising a lot of people.
You had a model that was able to
basically disprove one of the Erdos
conjectures. Would you Could you explain
that just a little bit?
>> Yeah, so our models last week uh
they were able to produce a proof of the
a disprove rather of the unit distance
conjecture due to Erdos.
And this was an 80-year-old open problem
in the field of field of uh
combinatorial geometry where basically
the question concerns uh if you have n
points, let's say on a piece of paper,
>> Mhm.
>> how many of them can be 1 in apart uh
exactly?
And
how how many pairs can be 1 in apart
exactly?
And how does this number grow
asymptotically with the number of
points on the piece of paper?
>> This wasn't a a trivial problem when
Erdos put this together the idea was to
say that it could you know, like I think
the ideally was had to be only done on a
plane or something like this, but there
was you know, the idea that maybe there
was no better way and this has been out
there because it's a very interesting
problem and the fact that a model solved
this is pretty profound and also this
model was a general purpose model,
correct?
>> Yes, that's right. So, Erdos' original
conjecture
was essentially that
uh
the optimal the optimal solution to uh
having as many uh distance one points on
the plane was to arrange them in a
square grid.
>> Mhm.
>> And what the model proved was that the
square grid was not actually uh close to
optimal at all.
And that you can do much better uh
with a different construction using a
lot of uh
high-powered number theory.
>> And Jean, how did you how did you choose
these problems?
>> I guess we didn't really choose the
problem. We What happened was uh we want
to test the upper bound of our model's
capability.
>> Mhm.
>> So, we just use a selected subset of
Erdos' problems and to test the
capability of the model.
>> I would love to know one, who is the one
that hit enter and asked the model the
question?
>> I guess both of us, like I and Huang
Xuan.
>> You guys at the same time, like pressed
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah, maybe. I I think what happened was
actually we were testing like
two slightly different internal models.
>> Mhm.
>> And we both saw like some correct
solutions.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh it was really really exciting for us.
>> How did you know that it worked?
>> Of course, you first ask the model to
check it.
>> Okay.
>> Uh but of course, you know, models
sometimes they are not reliable. So,
>> I got it. It's good. Don't worry about
[laughter] it.
>> Yeah, so then we just uh after we
checked it with the model, it seems
plausible, then we just ask a bunch of
you know, other uh mathematics friends
in the company, you know, um Matab and
uh Max Salkin. Mhm. And at first, they
were like, "Oh, there's no way this can
be true. This is a major open problem."
And uh but after you know, just they
think about it for for a day, they
couldn't figure out any mistake. Then
they become more convinced. Then
eventually, they are like, "Actually,
this may be correct." Yeah, then like
everyone had a of time sleeping because
it's so,
>> [laughter]
>> so exciting, yeah.
>> What was the conversation like when you
started to getting, you know, people
saying that this was accurate?
>> For me, I was not that surprised because
I guess when my top first say, okay,
first what happened was first my top say
this is definitely wrong.
>> Okay.
>> But I actually knew that he probably
just spent like 5 minutes, 10 minutes
counting it. So, like in my heart I
don't really believe that.
Um, but later he told me it's 50%. I was
thinking, okay, if we extrapolate the
trend, then maybe next night if we 100%.
>> [laughter]
>> Um.
So, yeah, I guess
it's a little bit dream-like,
um, but also was like it feels a bit
little bit natural that, um,
that this model would do something
amazing. Later it it just become more
and more, um,
more and more real that, um, this might
actually be correct. This might actually
be a big deal. The first time Auto can
publish something that would get it into
like uh, top math journals.
It's like we knew this day is going to
come but never knew that it's going to
become it's going to become reality so
fast.
It's like living your dream.
>> I mean, this is something like can be
published in like the best journal of
math. It is way beyond like a, you know,
IMO level.
>> Mhm.
>> So, I I would expect something to happen
at some time but at some at some point,
but maybe not this just not this this
May, yeah.
>> Mhm. One of the things I think that we
we've seen emphasized at OpenAI is that
OpenAI doesn't try to train to specific
benchmarks and stuff. That OpenAI tries
to build really good general overall
models. And I think sometimes people say
like, well, we just try to build a
generally smart model and we find these
things a lot of way. And when it comes
to reasoning it's the same thing.
Something that's really good at
reasoning overall, you find these
capabilities.
Does that ring true for you or?
>> Yeah, I think yeah, I think for for this
model in particular, I think
it's one that, um, I think all of us
have also just used um like in lieu of
uh the current model uh current model in
uh Codex.
And it it it works quite well as just a
general purpose model. Having the
capabilities to do this uh Erdos uh unit
distance result, I think people will be
able to do this at home in the uh in the
near future.
>> It's been exciting to see people react
to this and pay attention to this.
We went from just a very short period of
time ago where people said models
weren't good at math, and now models are
doing this. What have been some of the
more fun things you've seen online or
reactions from people?
>> Ever since we announced our results, my
friends uh in TC has started to uh
asking me to try try it on their open
problems, uh including my advisor gave
me like two three open problems to try
on.
Um
I I think the reaction was um very
positive.
>> I think people really get a sense that
the frontier of AI today can
really uh come up with you know research
output that I think many human
mathematicians would be proud to
achieve. Um
I think it's really great that we're
able to communicate this like you know
that this is the frontier of progress to
the rest of the world. I've seen people
like you know make these uh make these
like designs of trying to like sketch
out um
like the almost construction if if you
plot it on a grid it's actually like
this very like
pretty like symmetric geometric design.
>> Yeah, I guess we are thinking maybe try
to make one of the design you know
put them in a frame and put them on desk
or something. Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> Can do celebrate this like you know
moment.
>> Yeah, I think it's going to be fun when
we start seeing it things like tiling
problems and other stuff where we can
actually just look at the the artifacts
when we need. So, we've been hearing
more about Erdős' problems lately, and
some seem like they weren't as
challenging to solve as perhaps as
people thought. They just needed some
attention. Yet, this one seems to be a
little bit more complicated. Where would
you rank this?
>> Erdős, I think he proposed like a
thousand question or more, right? So,
like he, you know, Erdős' problem is
just collection of all the problems he
has asked. You know, some problem he has
offered some money for for solution.
Some problem like he just, you know,
noted. And this this problem he, you
know, he offered I think $500.
>> Mhm.
>> And which is from last century. So, you
know, it's it was a little bit. Yeah.
And also like this is one of the
central question in this field of
discrete geometry. And you know, and
this is has been, you know, heavily
discussed by mathematician in like many
discrete geometry papers. And so, it's
kind of one of the question people have
thought about a lot and really want to
see the answer. So, I would say this is
more like a major open problem in a
concrete field of mathematics instead of
some just like, you know,
many other Erdős question which may be
just some, you know,
something like Erdős asked after lunch
or something.
>> So, how do you collect that $500?
Did it Did it Did it Did it disappear
when he passed away?
>> I think there's a special agency for
that, but you usually people just frame
the the check.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, maybe we'll just frame the
check in Sam's office. I don't know.
>> [laughter]
>> How do you feel this
proves that reasoning is effective?
>> Well, I think the biggest proof is that
if you look at the plot the in the
official blog,
>> Mhm.
>> if you give the model more time to
think, it the accuracy on this problem
goes faster.
>> Mhm.
>> Like if you give it a lot of time, you
can get almost 50% correct. So, more
thinking, more correctness. I think
that's really a proof of reasoning being
effective.
>> But I'll also go back to this. This
isn't a math model. This is a model that
can do a lot of many different things.
Do you see a correlation between as
these get better at solving things like
mathematics that it works with other
general problems?
>> That's the hypothesis at least is that,
you know, this model was not trained
specifically for math. And so and we
just wanted to, you know, like we had
this new model. How we came about this
we wanted to take it on a test drive
essentially.
And so we evaluated it on some, you
know, very challenging math problems.
And to just see like what what can it
do?
>> When you go through the proof and you
look at what it came up with, were there
things that surprised you, things that
you would describe as creative?
>> So for some context like the
proof is like well above my own
mathematical pay grade.
But like just at at a high level my
understanding was that, you know, this
this idea of uh
taking class field theory and applying
it to problems in in combinatorial
geometry hadn't really been done before.
Though this was though there were like,
you know,
though some people like knew that there
was there could be this bridge between
these two fields. Being able to do that
and execute it requires like to first of
all to make the connection requires
uh quite a bit of like insane creative
creativity and then to execute the proof
is also like, you know, a very like
delicate careful affair that very few
people would be able to do.
>> I think the most surprising thing for me
is you tell model to do something
and you you went to have a lunch
and when you come back you see that it
actually does much better than you
thought.
>> Mhm.
>> And at that moment you feel like
okay, this model is something that's
really amazing.
>> So going back to
GPT 3.5 Turbo and working with that and
looking at a model that was doing
automatically instant sort of uh
inference and pre-figuring these things
out to now a model that's able to do
incredible mathematical proofs. Is it
using tools? Is it using lean? Is it
using some other things like that? Or is
it doing purely inside the model?
>> For the
>> For the case, the model basically is
like Codex. It can code. It can
look at the website and find
information. Yeah, so it's it's
basically a general ChatGPT setup.
ChatGPT can also write Python and
execute them. But I don't think that the
model would write anything. Yeah.
>> I think they just have a story about the
Cambridge dictionary.
>> Oh, okay. So, okay, the first thing the
model do when it gets to the website is
to check what unit means in the
Cambridge dictionary.
It's a little bit ridiculous, yeah.
>> So, it like looked up the word unit?
>> Yeah, it wants to make sure it has the
absolute correct understanding of what
is unit.
>> Have you seen it do other things like
that where you're seeing like, "Oh, it's
trying to ground itself to make sure it
understands the question."
>> And definitely, a lot of time in the
model answering, it will actually
explain the definition again
to show that it actually grounded
definitions.
>> As people who are
very knowledgeable about computer
science, people who know a lot about
mathematics, is it intimidating to all
of us and see this happen?
>> I think it should not be intimidating. I
actually think it should be empowering.
After the proof actually come out,
like mathematician has improved first
improved the boundary proof.
And secondly, they use the intuition,
motivation of the construction to
knock down other open problems as well.
So, I think the trend is going to
continue.
Like model can make good breakthrough on
some very hard questions we don't know
how to solve.
But then, how to digest that idea, how
to
use that method for other good things,
Uh, I think humans still has a role in
this.
>> So, what do you think the role of
somebody working in mathematics is going
to be like 5 years from now?
>> I think there will be a lot of AI and
the human collaboration. Yeah, because
AI and now, you know, AI they know a
lot, right? They can connect distant
ideas, but human can also think for
longer. Like uh currently it seems AI
cannot build a new theory for math,
>> Mhm.
>> for example. But I guess human once they
have the help of AI, they can just grab
all the ideas from different field of
math, I think they can empower human way
more.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you see this working into other
fields? Are we going to see discoveries
in physics?
>> So, I mean, I I can't speak for uh
physics, but um
I mean, I guess like we're we're all
researchers in AI, and I think
definitely for me,
like my day-to-day looks completely
different than when I first started uh
doing res- research in this field.
Um
I think like
so much of my work is now done by coding
agents.
Um
like I can
I can just like
do so much more.
And I think that that's been a sort of
like magical feeling that like with AI,
you you can you're really starting not
to feel like you can use AI to build AI
faster.
>> How much has AI changed the way you do
these sorts of things?
>> I think totally completely. Like even
when I just joined uh half a year ago,
uh I was hand coding the codes,
>> Mhm.
>> uh
looking up the Slack channels for like
directions,
uh but now the default is just ask
Codex.
>> Mhm.
>> And I ask Codex to do a lot of things,
and
um then I just go to lunch, I just go to
uh
you know, talk to people.
>> Mhm.
>> Um the work completely changes.
>> And I use Codex on your phone when you
can check on it.
>> Yeah.
>> It's uh it's interesting how much more
I want to do things now that you have
this sort of tool that can work all the
time and do stuff.
Lejay, how do you explain this to your
friends who are sort of trying to
understand what this means and how it's
going to impact other fields?
>> So, I mean, I have some mathematician
friends and I have some, you know,
friends in in other fields. Yeah. So, I
think the way I I would tell them is
that I feel like, you know, some some
may be afraid that AI will replace them,
you know, AI will just replace
mathematician. Yeah, but I think it's
really about, you know, empowering like
every theoretical researcher. Yeah,
because, you know, AI really have this
advantage of knowing so many stuff and
connect things. Currently, it seems like
the problem hard for human may not be
hard for AI.
>> Mhm.
>> And that's a really great thing. Like,
we can use AI to solve those those
problems, get new ideas, and then we can
digest them and then make new discovery.
Just like Hongqing said, yeah. So, I
think some of them get very excited
about this. And of course, I one thing
is that, you know, currently it's only
on math, but I believe that because it's
general reasoning model, like other
exist theoretical researcher, they can
benefit a lot from that. Like, I think
the dream world will be like everyone
have some access to the top-level
reasoning ability. So, all the
researcher can use them to to discover
whatever they
they want to discover. And then
basically, Open AI will accelerate
science
like a lot. Like, because you are
empowering every scientist to accelerate
the science worldwide. I think that's
our mission.
>> So, if I was a researcher, how would I
get started? What advice would you have
to say, "Okay, try this first." We'll
start with you, Hongqing.
>> Get GPT Pro subscription.
>> Yeah, of course.
>> It's really really much better than
thinking without Pro.
Uh and because it think longer.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh
and try to
um ask the boldest question you can ask.
>> Mhm.
>> I had an experience that sometimes I try
to decompose a problem into smaller
problem and ask the model. And turns out
that it was not as good as just directly
ask a question because my deep
conversation was not the best way.
>> Why do you think that was?
>> I think because as human we have all
kinds of priors on how problem should be
solved and they are very helpful in
reducing the thinking time.
Um but uh very often the prior are wrong
and there are blind spots and AI models
they sometimes just can, you know,
surprise us with
uh discovering these hidden things.
>> When I spoke to Alex Muchasta, he talked
about how kind of treating it like a
graduate student. You know, not not
talking down too low but not too high
but at the right level so you could just
understand that it knew the terms and
work for you. Alex, how about for you?
What advice would you give somebody
who's a researcher who's wants to try to
figure out how to be more effective with
this?
>> Yeah, I think a lot of it is actually
like
I think these days learning to trust the
model
>> Mhm.
>> and like figuring out like, you know,
how far you can go in trusting the model
and also learning like, you know, what's
beyond what the model can do. Because if
you don't have a sense of that, you
don't like, you know, maximally
uh
use uh the full capabilities of the
model. I think Lije has taught me a lot
about how to use these tools better. I I
I feel like I'm I'm like sort of a
dinosaur in some respects
in terms of adoption cuz I think I I
started like
working at OpenAI well before these
tools existed and so I think I have a
lot of old bad habits where I I don't
trust the models enough. I still think
it's like the models of 6 months ago or
something.
>> That's an interesting paradigm. Okay.
So,
Lije, what advice would you give?
>> Oh, I have this like mess it up, you
know, every time you double your trust
on a model and see why it fails. And if
it fails, you just go go back.
>> Mhm.
>> And then like you you you you do this
every month. Then you just you can
quickly get to the
point where you can maximally trust the
model but also not breaking your stuff.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah, and apparently for the last 5
months it's going really, you know,
exponentially.
>> Back in the GPT-3 days, I had like a
list of tests and things like this I
would do. And I'd watch them sort of
incrementally get better, and then
GPT-4, and then by the time 01 came out,
I had to throw it out cuz that was just
a toy problems at that point. And I feel
like I have to continuously sort of
adjust and kind of keep trying figuring
more complicated things to do that with.
Do you think that for somebody who's in
mathematics or in a related field right
now who's feeling a little bit concerned
by this, do you think that they should
be taking a more optimistic approach?
>> I think it it it
is legit to feel concerned. Um
especially when the field is a lot like
a lot of field is problem-solving
oriented.
>> Mhm.
>> Um because model are going to be really
good at problem-solving.
Um but
mathematics is
uh
really really much more than
problem-solving. It's more about
understanding the structure and uh
building new theories, like Li Jie said.
Um
and I think we should
uh try to figure out how to be better
use the model to help us
uh in solving the problems that we met,
and then um try to accelerate the speed
that we build new theory and come up
with new understandings.
Um
I think
that's the uh more optimistic view.
>> When Codex becomes much better, they can
do so much more simply you you will
expect you are working less because
Codex good. But somehow you actually
working more because that's way more
thing you can do. So actually hope this
can happen for math as well. You know,
like the model become so good, then I
must imagine have 10 ideas, you can ask
10 model to try them and see like one of
them succeed. And you they don't have to
do tedious calculation by themselves,
right? So like I I only imagine like
maybe
you know, what happened with coding can
happen to mathematician. Yeah.
>> It does actually because I you know,
when we talk about the Erdős problems,
Paul Erdős was a very interesting person
who found a lot of things curious and
said, "Oh, this is neat." And we have
this category of problems he put
together, but there's not a lot of rhyme
or reason to them. They were just things
that he found curious or worked with
other people on. And I think that's kind
of a big thing that's neat about science
in general is often we think that there
are these real specific hierarchies, but
literally it can just be things we're
curious about.
That being said, how long before there
are no more unsolved Erdős problems?
>> Some of them are very, very hard.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, so yeah, I don't know.
>> Do you foresee us maybe Alex needing to
come up with a new category of problems?
>> I think that probably like the hardest
problems on that list, I think that list
includes like the Collatz conjecture.
Like these are problems that feel like
very, very far out of reach of like the
mathematical technology of today, even
though many of them are like quite
simple to state.
>> So,
>> we'll still have some more things to
work on and continuously move things
through. That's good to know. It's
exciting though too just to to think
about what happens when you do it start
applying this to other areas in physics
and astronomy and start looking at data
sets and stuff and what kind of
discoveries are going to be in store.
Do you have any particular area that
you're hoping to see?
>> Oh, I'm hoping to solve P versus NP.
>> Okay. [laughter]
How about you, Alex?
>> I think the next milestone in my head is
really like AI that can like do AI
research.
Um
I think there are so many like
unsolved problems here where it's in a
in a sense like
in many ways like limited by like the
you know, all the limitations of just
you know, our own intelligences. I I'm
optimistic about like you know, just
having AI broadly available as a
technology because there's just like so
much more demand for intelligence in the
world that you know, like humans can
supply.
>> Did you?
>> Oh, I wanted to say people is MP2, but
unfortunately said it. Yeah.
So, I guess beyond that, like one
concrete thing I'm very interested in is
that, you know, like the currently it
seems AI is trying to combine ideas from
different fields and of course in a very
novel and you know, sophisticated way,
but I like can can AI actually generate
completely new ideas from scratch. I
mean, that's something like we haven't
really seen concretely in AI. And that's
something I maybe want to see next
happening and that can be very cool.
>> Have you seen traces of that yet?
>> I think so. Like um
you know, even in this like latest
problem, I mean, I think some if you
look at the the child's thought, which
is like 125 pages, I think some some of
the thoughts are pretty creative.
>> Mhm.
>> Although they didn't work out. Yeah.
I mean, that the final idea is more like
combining all the stuff, but some of it
has some creative thoughts.
>> But it's interesting, you know, early on
arguments were like these models weren't
creative, but you could give it two
ideas that never been connected before
and say,
"What's the relationship?" And that
would be something very, very new and
felt like something different.
And I feel like we'll probably see more
of that.
Do you see us coming up with new forms
of mathematics?
>> Um I think that actually will be uh
further way down the line.
>> Mhm.
>> Um because
>> Next year.
>> [laughter]
>> Maybe. Um I think because models are
very, very good at coming up with some
idea to solve a problem,
>> Mhm.
>> but it's not good at like proposing a
completely new
uh different kind of math or proposing
new theory. How to get model to do that
is still like very, very open.
>> How I would think about it is uh
we see this
like, you know, like Moore's law for the
time horizon at which these models are
effective.
And
I think you you sort of feel that in
math where you know, there's like every
few months the amount of time these
models can like sort of work
independently for doubles.
Uh at least the amount of human
equivalent time.
And so you know, for solving problems,
if you're really really good at it,
maybe some problems like you know,
actually have pretty short paths for the
solution. You don't need to take that
long. But I think for uh inventing like
new ways of doing mathematics, that's
much more like a years or decades long
uh process. And so I think you know,
it's it'll still take a a bit of time
for that exponential to get there.
>> This was done by an internal model that
you guys worked on. And since then 5.5
has been able to do the same thing.
We've seen other labs have said that
they've been able to do this as well.
Um but this was several weeks ago, which
is now ancient history. What have we
seen since then?
>> I think uh
one difference between uh you know,
the original result and uh
I think what the follow-up findings have
been is that like actually for the
original model, there was like no
scaffolding needed. No You sort of just
asked it to do the do the problem and
then it gave you the answer. And so
actually this is all uh you can you can
read the original prompt and response in
the uh in this uh note we uploaded on
the blog. Whereas I think the follow-up
up efforts have had a little bit more
like structure or like steering of the
models. Um
But I think one interesting data point
here is that like
you know,
it's really all about test time compute
scaling. Um after we initially solved
the problem, and this this is the plot
Lizia brought up earlier, is that you
know, with enough uh test time compute
budget, uh
the model is able to solve the problem
around 50% of the time. So it's not
surprising that like you know,
you can you can get you can get there
with other method. You can find this
with other methods as well. But I think
what's was really important here is just
that like, you know, as you pour in more
test time compute, you get better
results.
>> It seems like it's kind of a virtuous
cycle where you take today's model, give
it more compute, let it solve for that,
and you understand how these findings
can be solved. Next generation models
can learn from that and just get more
and more efficient, and you just have
this
basically, it seems like it just scales
forever, right? What do you think we're
going to see by the end of the year?
>> What I want to see is that you know,
people use our model to discover lots of
new stuff, and not only in math, but
also in all of science. Of course,
OpenAI wants to do some cool math stuff,
but I think it would be better everyone
can use the model to to like discover
their own science, yeah.
>> Mhm.
>> And I would expect like many
mathematician will use the model. I
mean, maybe not completely on the model,
but I collaborate with the model to
discover a lot of more math results. I
think that'll be really cool.
>> I mean, I've talked to some
mathematicians who know others or who
are very reticent to even try using AI
in mathematics.
Uh
what is the best argument you can give?
>> I think I'll just show them the proof of
distance conjecture.
The this proof of the conjecture. I
think just about productivity, right?
Like we do math not just to
enjoy the pleasure of the
problem solving, but also to
uh
advance the field and
um
to understand
the the truth
that's what we're looking for. And uh
using AI is going to speed up speed up
that by a lot.
And it's going to tell us what we are
really struggling to find, and
uh it
it will be
hard to resist using AI at some point.
>> You could be an astronomer not use a
telescope, but you kind of has to ask
why.
>> Yeah.
>> Exactly.
>> I know one of the researchers here likes
to watch computers play chess against
each other and he feels like he
sometimes learns things from that. Do
you think that we'll learn to be better
mathematicians or researchers or
scientists or just thinkers in general
by watching the solutions the models
come up with?
>> Looking at the 125
pages of
uh thinking it's probably not very
helpful for a mathematician.
But just by looking at the answer
you actually
do learn some
uh idea that uh was not there before
that I didn't know before.
>> Mhm.
>> And that inspires the later mathematical
works
that knocked out other problems. So I
definitely think people learn some like
mathematicians learn something from AI
solutions. Yeah, so some of the
mathematician that we asked to review
the proof
together with collaborators they
actually use the idea to disprove the
sum-product conjecture uh but for real
numbers.
Uh I think that's like one very good
example uh AI can crack down important
questions and give us ideas that we can
apply elsewhere.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah, I think it's remarkable that like
you know
like this group of mathematicians has
already like just in the span of a week
already used it to uh you know, disprove
this result that I think is maybe of
like similar importance to uh the unit
distance conjecture. So I think this is
a wonderful example of uh mathematicians
like
like seeing this and using it as
inspiration and you know bringing the
ideas to bear on a different problem.
>> What does this mean for the mathematical
community?
>> I think for us like when we uh do these
experiments I think we want to like make
sure uh we
like
like empower the academic communities we
interact with.
Um where we don't just like go to some
community and like, you know, from the
outside try to like solve a bunch of
their problems and like give them a
bunch of like AI slop, but what we
really want to do is we want to uh make
these tools available
uh
to researchers and let them direct uh
you know
this like all this like AI test time
computer at the problems they think are
important. Um
I think it's not it's I think it's like
really shouldn't be viewed as a race to
like, you know, solve as many Erdős
problems as we can,
but um but more like, you know,
we want to like make people aware that
the technology is out there. This is
what it can do.
>> You're not trying to solve every Erdős
problem.
>> Yeah, I don't I would not say that is
our goal. Um I think this has just
happened to be a particularly
significant result that we thought would
be important to uh you know, share with
the world that this is the capability
level uh of models today. But but this
is like it's really not the goal to
like, you know, just like go through the
list as if it were a race.
>> Do you foresee things applying to like
cryptography? And there's also some
debate too about do these models get so
good that
we kind of surpass even where
quantum computing goes, which sounds
kind of crazy?
>> Yeah, I think cryptography is really a
important topic these days because, you
know, the foundation of cryptography is
really about some problems like
factoring is hard to solve by by
computers, right? But basically we only
have conjecture. There's no mathematical
proof of this fact. And let's suppose a
model gets really good at the at you
know
algorithms, maybe they will prove, you
know, some of the cryptography
conjecture and saying, "Okay, those
those protocol are actually secure. We
don't have to conjecture them to be
secure." Or maybe they'll have they'll
find some loophole. And that's also very
important like, you know,
I think we need to make sure, you know,
that the foundation of our of our
security is good. So, the model can
stress test the the foundation of the
cryptography to make sure, like, we have
better security.
>> What about quantum computing?
>> Uh
I think that's a very different
territory, right? Like, a quantum
computing, like, okay, actually, I used
to study quantum computing. Like, my
first paper is is on quantum advantage,
which shows, like, for some tasks,
quantum computer can do better than
classical um
com- computers. But, so far, I think the
models, I mean, they are just classical
computers. I mean, they are they do what
human can do. I mean, maybe a bit
better. The quantum computer
they can sometimes do, like, more fancy
stuff, like, simulating some quantum
effect in chemistry, which we probably
not so I'm not an expert on that, but
that might not
It's not clear, like, it is just two
different paradigms. So, yeah, so I'm
not super sure how they, like, compare
to each other.
>> But, I think AI is going to greatly
accelerate the the pace that we develop
quantum computers.
Uh like, in recent just in these years,
there's improvement in, like, error
correcting.
Uh like, you have error correcting code
quantum error correcting codes that
uh only uses, like, simpler type of
operations, and that really speed up the
like physical implementation. So, uh I
expect more of these to come from like
collaboration with AI.
Uh that uh AI can propose new, like,
quantum error correction algorithms, and
then we can develop the quantum
computers much faster.
>> Once you ask the model to solve a
question, you can ask of course follow
up with, you know, how did you solve it?
And can you explain this part of the
proof to me? And
then, the model will patiently try to
teach you how how everything goes line
by line. Yeah. So, it's like it's
actually not just, you know, one
one-shot problem solving. You can ask it
for a question to, you know, to learn
the how the proof works. And I I really
like that.
>> One thing you learn very quickly as a
researcher
is that if your results are too good to
be true, you probably have a bug
somewhere. I think every researcher has
like had an experience where like, you
know, they see amazing numbers from
their experiments and it turns out, you
know, there was like the the the
experiment was actually wrong. The the
numbers were wrong. You know, when I
first heard about this from Lujian
Hongshuang, um
that that was my prior. I was like, "Oh,
I'll wait I'll wait for them to like
like find the bug."
>> [laughter]
>> And like but then I think it as the like
as like the days went on,
um
it as you sort of like had this like
growing like optimism that, "Oh, like
you know, maybe this is the one in a
hundred times where it's like
it's like too good to be true, but it's
it's actually true."
>> Well, gentlemen, thank you very much.
>> Yeah, thanks so much.
>> Thank you so much.